Good Margaret, runthee to the parlor;
There shalt thou findmy cousin Beatrice
Proposing with theprince and Claudio:
Whisper her ear and tell her, Iand Ursula Walk in the orchard
and our whole discourseIs all of her;
say that thouoverheard'st us;
And bid her stealinto the pleached bower,
Where honeysuckles,ripen'd by the sun,
Forbid the sun toenter, like favourites,
Made proud by princes,that advance their pride
Against that power that bredit: there will she hide her,
To listen our purpose.
This is thy office; Bear theewell in it and leave us alone.
I'll make her come, Iwarrant you, presently.
Now, Ursula, whenBeatrice doth come,
As we do trace thisalley up and down,
Our talk mustonly be of Benedick.
When I do name him,let it be thy part
To praise him more thanever man did merit:
My talk to thee mustbe how Benedick
Is sick in lovewith Beatrice.
Of this matter Is littleCupid's crafty arrow made,
That onlywounds by hearsay.
Now begin; Forlook where Beatrice,
like a lapwing, runsClose by the ground,
to hear our conference.
The pleasant'st anglingis to see the fish
Cut with her golden oarsthe silver stream,
And greedily devourthe treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice;
who even now Is couched inthe woodbine coverture.
Fear you not mypart of the dialogue.
Then go we near her, thather ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet baitthat we lay for it.
No, truly, Ursula,she is too disdainful;
I know her spiritsare as coy and wild
As haggerds of the rock.
But are you sure That Benedickloves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the prince andmy new-trothed lord.
And did they bid youtell her of it, madam?
They did entreat meto acquaint her of it;
But I persuaded them,if they loved Benedick,
To wish himwrestle with affection,
And never to letBeatrice know of it.
Why did you so?
Doth not thegentleman
Deserve as full asfortunate a bed
As ever Beatriceshall couch upon?
O god of love!
I know he doth deserve
As much as may beyielded to a man:
But Nature never frameda woman's heart
Of prouder stuff thanthat of Beatrice;
Disdain and scorn ridesparkling in her eyes,
Misprising whatthey look on,
and her wit Values itselfso highly that to her
All matter else seemsweak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape norproject of affection,
She is so self-endeared.
Sure, I think so; Andtherefore certainly
it were not goodShe knew his love,
lest she make sport at it.
Why, you speak truth.
I never yet sawman, How wise,
how noble, young,how rarely featured,
But she would spell himbackward: if fair-faced,
She would swear the gentlemanshould be her sister;
If black, why, Nature,
drawing of an antique,Made a foul blot;
if tall, alance ill-headed;
If low, an agatevery vilely cut;
If speaking, why, avane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, ablock moved with none.
So turns she every manthe wrong side out
And never gives totruth and virtue that
Which simpleness andmerit purchaseth.
Sure, sure, such carpingis not commendable.
No, not to be so oddand from all fashions
As Beatrice is, cannotbe commendable:
But who dare tell her so?
If I should speak, Shewould mock me into air;
O, she would laugh me
Out of myself, pressme to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick,like cover'd fire,
Consume away in sighs,waste inwardly:
It were a better deaththan die with mocks,
Which is as bad asdie with tickling.
Yet tell her of it:hear what she will say.
No; rather I willgo to Benedick
And counsel him to fightagainst his passion.
And, truly, I'll devisesome honest slanders
To stain my cousin with:one doth not know
How much an ill wordmay empoison liking.
O, do not do yourcousin such a wrong.
She cannot be so muchwithout true judgment--
Having so swift andexcellent a wit
As she is prized tohave--as to refuse
So rare a gentlemanas Signior Benedick.
He is the onlyman of Italy.
Always exceptedmy dear Claudio.
I pray you, benot angry with me,
madam, Speaking myfancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing,argument and valour,
Goes foremost inreport through Italy.
Indeed, he hath anexcellent good name.
His excellence did earnit, ere he had it.
When are youmarried, madam?
Why, every day, to-morrow.
Come, go in: I'llshow thee some attires,
and have thy counsel me
Which is the best tofurnish me to-morrow.
She's limed, I warrant you:we have caught her, madam.
If it proves so, thenloving goes by haps:
Some Cupid kills witharrows, some with traps.
What fire is in mine ears?
Can this be true?
Stand I condemn'd forpride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell!
and maiden pride, adieu!
No glory livesbehind the back of such.
And, Benedick, loveon; I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heartto thy loving hand:
If thou dost love, mykindness shall incite thee
To bind our lovesup in a holy band;
For others saythou dost deserve,
and I Believe itbetter than reportingly.
I do but stay till yourmarriage be consummate,
and then go Itoward Arragon.
I'll bring youthither, my lord,
if you'll vouchsafe me.
Nay, that would beas great a soil
in the new glossof your marriage
as to show a child his new coatand forbid him to wear it.
I will only be bold withBenedick for his company;
for, from the crown of hishead to the sole of his foot,
he is all mirth:
he hath twice or thricecut Cupid's bow-string
and the little hangmandare not shoot at him;
he hath a heart assound as a bell
and his tongueis the clapper,
for what his heartthinks his tongue speaks.
Gallants, I amnot as I have been.
So say I methinksyou are sadder.
I hope he be in love.
Hang him, truant!
there's no truedrop of blood in him,
to be truly touchedwith love: if he be sad,
he wants money.
I have the toothache.
Draw it.
Hang it!
You must hang it first,and draw it afterwards.
What!
sigh for the toothache?
Well, every one can master agrief but he that has it.
Yet say I, he is in love.
There is no appearanceof fancy in him,
unless it be a fancy that hehath to strange disguises;
as, to be a Dutchman today,
a Frenchman to-morrow.
Unless he have afancy to this foolery,
as it appears he hath,he is no fool for fancy,
as you would haveit appear he is.
If he be not inlove with some woman,
there is no believing old signs:a' brushes his hat o' mornings;
what should that bode?
Hath any man seenhim at the barber's?
No, but the barber's manhath been seen with him,
and the old ornamentof his cheek
hath already stuffedtennis-balls.
Indeed, he looksyounger than he did,
by the loss of a beard.
Nay, a' rubs himself with civet:can you smell him out by that?
That's as much as to say,the sweet youth's in love.
The greatest note ofit is his melancholy.
And when was hewont to wash his face?
Yea, or to paint himself?
for the which, I hearwhat they say of him.
Nay, but hisjesting spirit;
which is now creptinto a lute-string
and now governedby stops.
Indeed, that hangs aheavy tale for him:
conclude, concludehe is in love.
Nay, but I knowwho loves him.
That would I know too:
I warrant, one thatknows him not.
Yes, and hisill conditions;
and, in despite ofall, dies for him.
She shall be buriedwith her face upwards.
Yet is this no charmfor the toothache.
Old signior, walkaside with me:
I have studied eight or ninewise words to speak to you,
which these hobby-horsesmust not hear.
For my life, to breakwith him about Beatrice.
'Tis even so.
Hero and Margaret
have by this played theirparts with Beatrice;
and then the two bears
will not bite oneanother when they meet.
My lord andbrother, God save you!
Good den, brother.
If your leisure served,I would speak with you.
In private?
If it please you: yetCount Claudio may hear;
for what I wouldspeak of concerns him.
What's the matter?
Means your lordship tobe married to-morrow?
You know he does.
I know not that, whenhe knows what I know.
If there beany impediment,
I pray you discover it.
You may think I love you not:
let that appear hereafter,and aim better at me
by that I now will manifest.
For my brother, Ithink he holds you well,
and in dearness of heart
hath holp to effectyour ensuing marriage;
--surely suit ill spentand labour ill bestowed.
Why, what's the matter?
I came hither to tell you;
and, circumstances shortened,for she has been too long
a talking of, thelady is disloyal.
Who, Hero?
Even she;Leonato's Hero, your Hero,
every man'sHero: Disloyal?
The word is too good topaint out her wickedness;
I could say she were worse:think you of a worse title,
and I will fit her to it.
Wonder not till further warrant:go but with me to-night,
you shall see herchamber-window entered,
even the night beforeher wedding-day:
if you love her then,to-morrow wed her;
but it would better fit yourhonour to change your mind.
May this be so?
I will not think it.
If you dare nottrust that you see,
confess not that you know:if you will follow me,
I will show you enough;
and when you have seenmore and heard more,
proceed accordingly. If Isee any thing to-night
why I should not marry herto-morrow in the congregation,
where I should wed,there will I shame her.
And, as I wooed forthee to obtain her,
I will join withthee to disgrace her.
I will disparage her no farthertill you are my witnesses:
bear it coldly buttill midnight,
and let theissue show itself.
O day untowardly turned!
O mischiefstrangely thwarting!
O plague rightwell prevented!
so will you say whenyou have seen the sequel.
(cats meowing, dogs barking)
Are you good men and true?
Yea, or else it were pity butthey should suffer salvation,
body and soul.
Nay, that were a punishmenttoo good for them,
if they should have anyallegiance in them,
being chosen forthe prince's watch.
Well, give themtheir charge,
neighbour Dogberry.
First, who think you the mostdesertless man to be constable?
Hugh Otecake, sir,or George Seacole;
for they canwrite and read.
Come hither,neighbour Seacole.
God hath blessed youwith a good name:
to be a well-favoured manis the gift of fortune;
but to write andread comes by nature.
Both which,master constable,
- You have: I knew itwould be your answer.
Well, for yourfavour, sir,
why, give God thanks,and make no boast of it;
and for yourwriting and reading,
let that appear when thereis no need of such vanity.
You are thought here tobe the most senseless
and fit man for theconstable of the watch;
therefore bearyou the lantern.
This is your charge: you shallcomprehend all vagrom men;
you are to bid any man stand,in the prince's name.
How if a' will not stand?
Why, take no noteof him, but let him go;
and presently call the restof the watch
and thank God youare rid of a knave.
If he will not standwhen he is bidden,
he is none of theprince's subjects.
True, and theyare to meddle
with none but theprince's subjects.
Also, you shall make nonoise in the streets;
for, for the watch to babbleand to talk is most tolerable
and not to be endured.
We will rather sleep than talk:
we know what belongsto a watch.
Why, you speak like an ancientand most quiet watchman;
for I cannot see howsleeping should offend:
only, have a care thatyour bills be not stolen.
Well, you are to callat all the ale-houses,
and bid those that aredrunk get them to bed.
How if they will not?
Why, then, let them alonetill they are sober:
if they make you notthen the better answer,
you may say they are notthe men you took them for.
Well, sir.
If you meet a thief,you may suspect him,
by virtue of youroffice, to be no true man;
and, for such kind of men,
the less you meddleor make with them,
why the more isyour honesty.
If we know himto be a thief,
shall we notlay hands on him?
Truly, by youroffice, you may;
but I think they that touchpitch will be defiled:
the most peaceableway for you,
if you do take a thief,is to let him show himself
what he is and stealout of your company.
You have been always calleda merciful man, partner.
Truly, I would nothang a dog by my will,
much more a man whohath any honesty in him.
If you hear a childcry in the night,
you must call to the nurseand bid her still it.
How if the nurse be asleepand will not hear us?
Why, then,depart in peace,
and let the childwake her with crying;
for the ewe that will nothear her lamb when it baes
will never answer acalf when he bleats.
'Tis very true.
This is the endof the charge:--
you, constable, are to presentthe prince's own person:
if you meet theprince in the night,
you may stay him.
Nay, by'r our lady,that I think a' cannot.
Five shillingsto one on't,
any man thatknows the statutes,
may stay him: marry, notwithout the prince be willing;
for, indeed, the watchought to offend no man;
and it is an offence to staya man against his will.
By'r lady, Ithink it be so.
Well, masters, good night:
an there be any matter ofweight chances, call up me:
keep your fellows' counselsand your own; and good night.
Come, neighbour.
Well, masters, we hear ourcharge: let us go sit here
upon thechurch-bench till two,
and then all to bed.
One word more,honest neighbours.
I pray you watch aboutSignior Leonato's door;
for the weddingbeing there to-morrow,
there is a greatcoil to-night.
Adieu: bevigitant, I beseech you.
(♪music)
What Conrade!
Peace! stir not.
Conrade, I say!
Here, man; I amat thy elbow.
Mass, and my elbow itched;
I thought there woulda scab follow.
I will owe thee ananswer for that:
now forwardwith thy tale.
Stand thee close, then,under this pent-house,
for it drizzles rain;
and I will, like a truedrunkard, utter all to thee.
Some treason,masters: yet stand close.
Therefore know I have earned ofDon John a thousand ducats.
Is it possible that anyvillany should be so dear?
Thou shouldst rather ask
if it were possible anyvillany should be so rich;
for when rich villainshave need of poor ones,
poor ones may makewhat price they will.
I wonder at it.
That shows thouart unconfirmed.
Thou knowest that thefashion of a doublet,
or a hat, or a cloak,is nothing to a man.
Yes, it is apparel.
I mean, the fashion.
Yes, the fashionis the fashion.
Tush!
I may as well saythe fool's the fool.
But seest thou not what adeformed thief this fashion is?
I know that Deformed;
a' has been a vilethief this seven year;
a' goes up and downlike a gentleman:
I remember his name.
Didst thou nothear somebody?
No; 'twas thevane on the house.
Seest thou not, I say, what adeformed thief this fashion is?
how giddily a' turnsabout all the hot bloods
between fourteen andfive-and-thirty?
Art not thou thyselfgiddy with the fashion too,
that thou hast shiftedout of thy tale
into telling meof the fashion?
Not so, neither: but knowthat I have to-night wooed
Margaret, the LadyHero's gentlewoman,
by the name of Hero:
she leans me out at hermistress' chamber-window,
bids me a thousandtimes good night,
I tell this tale vilely:
I should first tellthee how the prince,
and Claudio and my master,planted and placed
and possessed by mymaster Don John,
saw afar off in the orchardthis amiable encounter.
And thought theyMargaret was Hero?
Two of them did, theprince and Claudio;
but the devil my masterknew she was Margaret;
and partly by his oaths,which first possessed them,
partly by the dark night,
which did deceive them,but chiefly by my villany,
which did confirm any slanderthat Don John had made,
away went Claudio enraged;
swore he would meether, as he was appointed,
next morningat the temple,
and there, before thewhole congregation,
shame her with whathe saw o'er night
and send her home againwithout a husband.
We charge you, in theprince's name, stand!
Call up the rightmaster constable.
We have here recovered themost dangerous piece of
lechery that ever wasknown in the commonwealth.
And one Deformed isone of them: I know him;
a' wears a lock.
Masters, masters,--
You'll be made bring Deformedforth, I warrant you.
Masters,-- Neverspeak: we charge you
let us obey you to go with us.
We are like to provea goodly commodity,
being taken up ofthese men's bills.
A commodity inquestion, I warrant you.
Come, we'll obey you.
Good Ursula, wakemy cousin Beatrice,
and desire her to rise.
I will, lady.
And bid her come hither.
Well.
Troth, I think yourother rabato were better.
No, pray thee, goodMeg, I'll wear this.
By my troth,'s not so good;
and I warrant yourcousin will say so.
My cousin's a fool,and thou art another:
I'll wear none but this.
I like the new tirewithin excellently,
if the hair were athought browner;
and your gown's a mostrare fashion, i' faith.
I saw the Duchess of Milan'sgown that they praise so.
O, that exceeds, they say.
By my troth, 's but a night-gownin respect of yours:
cloth o' gold, and cuts,
and laced withsilver, set with pearls,
down sleeves,side sleeves,
and skirts, round underbornewith a bluish tinsel:
but for a fine, quaint, gracefuland excellent fashion,
yours is worth ten on 't.
God give mejoy to wear it!
for my heart isexceeding heavy.
'Twill be heavier soonby the weight of a man.
Fie upon thee!
art not ashamed?
Of what, lady?
of speaking honourably?
Is not marriagehonourable in a beggar?
Is not your lord honourablewithout marriage?
I think youwould have me say,
'saving your reverence, ahusband:' and bad thinking
do not wresttrue speaking,
I'll offend nobody:
is there any harm in 'theheavier for a husband'?
None, I think,
and it be the right husbandand the right wife;
otherwise 'tis light,and not heavy:
ask my Lady Beatriceelse; here she comes.
Good morrow, coz.
Good morrow, sweet Hero.
Why how now?
do you speak inthe sick tune?
I am out of all othertune, methinks.
Clap's into'Light o' love;
that goes without a burden:
do you sing it, andI'll dance it.
Ye light o' love,with your heels!
'Tis almost fiveo'clock, cousin;
tis time you were ready.
By my troth, I amexceeding ill: heigh-ho!
For a hawk, ahorse, or a husband?
For the letterthat begins them all,
H.
Well, and you benot turned Turk,
there's no moresailing by the star.
What means the fool, trow?
Nothing I; but God send everyone their heart's desire!
These gloves thecount sent me;
they are anexcellent perfume.
I am stuffed,cousin; I cannot smell.
A maid, and stuffed!
there's goodlycatching of cold.
O, God help me!
God help me!
how long have youprofessed apprehension?
Even since you left it.
Doth not my witbecome me rarely?
It is not seen enoughoften enough,
you should wear it inyour cap.
By my troth, I am ill.
Get you some of this distilledCarduus Benedictus,
and lay it to your heart:
it is the onlything for a qualm.
There thou prickesther with a thistle.
Benedictus!
why Benedictus?
you have some moralin this Benedictus.
Moral!
no, by my troth, Ihave no moral meaning;
I meant, plainholy-thistle.
You may think perchance thatI think you are in love:
nay, by'r lady, I am not sucha fool to think what I list,
nor I list not tothink what I can,
nor indeed I cannot think,
if I would think myheart out of thinking,
that you are inlove or that you
will be in love orthat you can be in love.
Yet Benedickwas such another,
and now is hebecome a man:
he swore he wouldnever marry,
and yet now, indespite of his heart,
he eats his meatwithout grudging:
and how you may beconverted I know not,
but methinks you look withyour eyes as other women do.
What pace is thisthat thy tongue keeps?
Not a false gallop.
Madam, withdraw: theprince, the count,
Signior Benedick, Don John,
and all the gallantsof the town,
are come tofetch you to church.
Help to dressme, good coz,
good Meg, good Ursula.
What would you withme, honest neighbour?
Marry, sir, I would havesome confidence with you
that decerns you nearly.
Brief, I pray you; for you seeit is a busy time with me.
Marry, this it is, sir.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.
What is it, mygood friends?
Goodman Verges, sir, speaksa little off the matter:
an old man, sir, and hiswits are not so blunt as,
God help, I woulddesire they were;
but, in faith, honest as theskin between his brows.
Yes, I thank God I am ashonest as any man living
that is an old manand no honester than I.
Comparisons are odorous:
palabras, neighbour Verges.
Neighbours,you are tedious.
It pleases yourworship to say so,
but we are thepoor duke's officers;
but truly, formine own part,
if I were astedious as a king,
I could find it in my heart tobestow it all of your worship.
All thytediousness on me, ah?
Yea, an 'twere a thousandpound more than 'tis;
for I hear as goodexclamation on your
worship as of anyman in the city;
and though I bebut a poor man,
I am glad to hear it.
And so am I.
I would fain knowwhat you have to say.
Marry, sir, ourwatch to-night,
excepting yourworship's presence,
ha' ta'en a couple of as arrantknaves as any in Messina.
A good old man, sir;he will be talking:
as they say, when the age is in,the wit is out: God help us!
it is a world to see.
Well said, i' faith,neighbour Verges:
well, God's a good man; antwo men ride of a horse,
one must ride behind.
An honest soul,i' faith, sir;
by my troth he is,as ever broke bread;
but God is tobe worshipped;
all men arenot alike; alas,
good neighbour!
Indeed, neighbour, hecomes too short of you.
Gifts that God gives.
I must leave you.
One word, sir:our watch, sir,
have indeed comprehendedtwo aspicious persons,
and we would have themthis morning examined
before your worship.
Take their examinationyourself and bring it me:
I am now in great haste,as it may appear unto you.
It shall be suffigance.
Drink some wine ereyou go: fare you well.
My lord, they stay for you
to give your daughterto her husband.
I'll wait uponthem: I am ready.
Go, good partner, go, getyou to Francis Seacole;
bid him bring his pen andinkhorn to the gaol:
we are now toexamination these men.
And we must do it wisely.
We will spare for nowit, I warrant you;
here's that shall drive someof them to a non-come:
only get the learned writer
to set down our excommunicationand meet me at the gaol.